src/documentation/phase13-role-based-access-control.md, before:

# Phase 13: Role-Based Access Control for UI Elements

## Overview
This phase implements role-based access control (RBAC) to restrict certain UI elements and navigation items based on the authenticated user's role. Customer Service (CS) users have limited access compared to Administrators, ensuring proper separation of responsibilities and system security.

## Key Features Implemented

### 1. Navigation Restrictions (`Sidebar.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: The following navigation items are completely hidden from Customer Service users:
  - Membership Plans (`/plans`)
  - Staff Management (`/staff`)
  - Shifts (`/shifts`)
  - Data Management (`/data`)
  - System Settings (`/settings`)

- **Implementation**: Added `adminOnly: true` property to restricted navigation items and filtered the navigation array based on user role.

### 2. Coupons Page Restrictions (`Coupons.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: "New Coupon Type" button is hidden from Customer Service users
- **Retained Access**: CS users can still:
  - View all sold coupons
  - Sell new coupons
  - View coupon details
  - Search and filter coupons

### 3. Products Page Restrictions (`Products.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: "Add Product" button is hidden from Customer Service users
- **Retained Access**: CS users can still:
  - View all products
  - Search and filter products
  - Manage stock levels
  - View product details

## Business Logic Implementation

### Role-Based Filtering
```typescript
// Navigation filtering based on user role
const navigation = allNavigation.filter(item => {
  if (item.adminOnly && profile?.role !== 'ADMIN') {
    return false;
  }
  return true;
});

// UI element conditional rendering
{profile?.role === 'ADMIN' && (
  <button>Admin Only Action</button>
)}
```

### Access Control Patterns
- **Conditional Rendering**: UI elements are conditionally rendered based on `profile?.role === 'ADMIN'`
- **Navigation Filtering**: Navigation items marked with `adminOnly: true` are filtered out for non-admin users
- **Graceful Degradation**: CS users see a clean interface without missing elements or broken layouts

## User Experience Features

### Administrator Experience
- **Full Access**: Administrators see all navigation items and UI elements
- **Complete Control**: Can access all system management features
- **No Changes**: Existing admin workflow remains unchanged

### Customer Service Experience
- **Focused Interface**: Clean, simplified interface focused on daily operations
- **Essential Functions**: Access to member management, check-ins, POS, and coupon sales
- **No Confusion**: Hidden elements prevent accidental access to restricted features

### Security Benefits
- **UI-Level Protection**: First line of defense against unauthorized access
- **Role Separation**: Clear distinction between admin and operational roles
- **Reduced Errors**: CS users cannot accidentally access admin functions

## Technical Implementation

### Component Architecture
- **Hook Integration**: Uses existing `useAuth` hook for role checking
- **Type Safety**: Maintains TypeScript type safety throughout
- **Performance**: Minimal performance impact with simple conditional checks
- **Maintainability**: Easy to add new role-based restrictions

### Navigation System
- **Dynamic Filtering**: Navigation items filtered at runtime based on user role
- **Extensible Design**: Easy to add new roles or modify permissions
- **Consistent Behavior**: Same filtering logic applied across all navigation

### Error Prevention
- **Null Safety**: Proper null checking for profile data
- **Fallback Behavior**: Graceful handling when profile is not loaded
- **Type Guards**: TypeScript ensures role values are valid

## Integration Points

### With Existing Systems
- **Authentication System**: Integrates seamlessly with existing auth context
- **Profile Management**: Uses existing profile data structure
- **Navigation System**: Extends existing sidebar navigation
- **Component Structure**: Maintains existing component architecture

### Future Enhancements
- **Granular Permissions**: Can be extended to support more specific permissions
- **Dynamic Roles**: Support for configurable roles and permissions
- **Audit Logging**: Track access attempts to restricted features
- **Role Hierarchy**: Support for role inheritance and hierarchies

## Security Considerations

### UI-Level Security
- **First Line Defense**: Prevents accidental access to restricted features
- **User Experience**: Improves UX by hiding irrelevant options
- **Not Sufficient Alone**: Must be combined with backend authorization
- **Complementary Protection**: Works alongside API-level security

### Backend Security
- **API Protection**: Backend APIs should also validate user roles
- **Database Security**: Row-level security policies enforce data access
- **Token Validation**: JWT tokens contain role information
- **Audit Trails**: All actions logged with user context

## Role Definitions

### Administrator (ADMIN)
- **Full System Access**: Can access all features and settings
- **User Management**: Can create, edit, and manage staff accounts
- **System Configuration**: Can modify system settings and business rules
- **Financial Management**: Access to all financial reports and settings
- **Data Management**: Can export, import, and backup system data

### Customer Service (CS)
- **Operational Access**: Focused on daily gym operations
- **Member Management**: Can register, renew, and manage members
- **Check-in Processing**: Can process all types of check-ins
- **POS Operations**: Can handle product sales and inventory viewing
- **Coupon Sales**: Can sell coupons but not create new templates

## Testing Considerations

### Role Switching
- **Test Coverage**: Verify UI changes when switching between roles
- **Navigation Testing**: Ensure restricted items are properly hidden
- **Functionality Testing**: Confirm CS users can still perform allowed actions
- **Error Handling**: Test behavior when profile data is unavailable

### Security Testing
- **Access Verification**: Confirm restricted features are not accessible
- **URL Protection**: Verify direct URL access is handled properly
- **State Management**: Test role changes during active sessions
- **Edge Cases**: Handle scenarios with invalid or missing role data

This implementation provides a solid foundation for role-based access control while maintaining a clean, intuitive user experience for both administrators and customer service staff.

Commit message:

Update Coupons RBAC - Default Tab and Hide Coupons Tab

src/documentation/phase13-role-based-access-control.md, after:

# Phase 13: Role-Based Access Control for UI Elements

## Overview
This phase implements role-based access control (RBAC) to restrict certain UI elements and navigation items based on the authenticated user's role. Customer Service (CS) users have limited access compared to Administrators, ensuring proper separation of responsibilities and system security.

## Key Features Implemented

### 1. Navigation Restrictions (`Sidebar.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: The following navigation items are completely hidden from Customer Service users:
  - Membership Plans (`/plans`)
  - Staff Management (`/staff`)
  - Shifts (`/shifts`)
  - Data Management (`/data`)
  - System Settings (`/settings`)

- **Implementation**: Added `adminOnly: true` property to restricted navigation items and filtered the navigation array based on user role.

### 2. Coupons Page Restrictions (`Coupons.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: 
  - "New Coupon Type" button is hidden from Customer Service users
  - "Coupons" tab (templates) is completely hidden from CS users
- **Default Tab**: "List of Coupons" is now the default tab for all users
- **Retained Access**: CS users can still:
  - View all sold coupons
  - Sell new coupons
  - View coupon details
  - Search and filter coupons
- **Simplified Interface**: CS users see only the sold coupons list without tab navigation

### 3. Products Page Restrictions (`Products.tsx`)
- **Hidden from CS Users**: "Add Product" button is hidden from Customer Service users
- **Retained Access**: CS users can still:
  - View all products
  - Search and filter products
  - Manage stock levels
  - View product details

## Business Logic Implementation

### Role-Based Filtering
```typescript
// Navigation filtering based on user role
const navigation = allNavigation.filter(item => {
  if (item.adminOnly && profile?.role !== 'ADMIN') {
    return false;
  }
  return true;
});

// UI element conditional rendering
{profile?.role === 'ADMIN' && (
  <button>Admin Only Action</button>
)}
```

### Access Control Patterns
- **Conditional Rendering**: UI elements are conditionally rendered based on `profile?.role === 'ADMIN'`
- **Navigation Filtering**: Navigation items marked with `adminOnly: true` are filtered out for non-admin users
- **Graceful Degradation**: CS users see a clean interface without missing elements or broken layouts

## User Experience Features

### Administrator Experience
- **Full Access**: Administrators see all navigation items and UI elements
- **Complete Control**: Can access all system management features
- **No Changes**: Existing admin workflow remains unchanged

### Customer Service Experience
- **Focused Interface**: Clean, simplified interface focused on daily operations
- **Essential Functions**: Access to member management, check-ins, POS, and coupon sales
- **No Confusion**: Hidden elements prevent accidental access to restricted features

### Security Benefits
- **UI-Level Protection**: First line of defense against unauthorized access
- **Role Separation**: Clear distinction between admin and operational roles
- **Reduced Errors**: CS users cannot accidentally access admin functions

## Technical Implementation

### Component Architecture
- **Hook Integration**: Uses existing `useAuth` hook for role checking
- **Type Safety**: Maintains TypeScript type safety throughout
- **Performance**: Minimal performance impact with simple conditional checks
- **Maintainability**: Easy to add new role-based restrictions

### Navigation System
- **Dynamic Filtering**: Navigation items filtered at runtime based on user role
- **Extensible Design**: Easy to add new roles or modify permissions
- **Consistent Behavior**: Same filtering logic applied across all navigation

### Error Prevention
- **Null Safety**: Proper null checking for profile data
- **Fallback Behavior**: Graceful handling when profile is not loaded
- **Type Guards**: TypeScript ensures role values are valid

## Integration Points

### With Existing Systems
- **Authentication System**: Integrates seamlessly with existing auth context
- **Profile Management**: Uses existing profile data structure
- **Navigation System**: Extends existing sidebar navigation
- **Component Structure**: Maintains existing component architecture

### Future Enhancements
- **Granular Permissions**: Can be extended to support more specific permissions
- **Dynamic Roles**: Support for configurable roles and permissions
- **Audit Logging**: Track access attempts to restricted features
- **Role Hierarchy**: Support for role inheritance and hierarchies

## Security Considerations

### UI-Level Security
- **First Line Defense**: Prevents accidental access to restricted features
- **User Experience**: Improves UX by hiding irrelevant options
- **Not Sufficient Alone**: Must be combined with backend authorization
- **Complementary Protection**: Works alongside API-level security

### Backend Security
- **API Protection**: Backend APIs should also validate user roles
- **Database Security**: Row-level security policies enforce data access
- **Token Validation**: JWT tokens contain role information
- **Audit Trails**: All actions logged with user context

## Role Definitions

### Administrator (ADMIN)
- **Full System Access**: Can access all features and settings
- **User Management**: Can create, edit, and manage staff accounts
- **System Configuration**: Can modify system settings and business rules
- **Financial Management**: Access to all financial reports and settings
- **Data Management**: Can export, import, and backup system data

### Customer Service (CS)
- **Operational Access**: Focused on daily gym operations
- **Member Management**: Can register, renew, and manage members
- **Check-in Processing**: Can process all types of check-ins
- **POS Operations**: Can handle product sales and inventory viewing
- **Coupon Sales**: Can sell coupons but not create new templates

## Testing Considerations

### Role Switching
- **Test Coverage**: Verify UI changes when switching between roles
- **Navigation Testing**: Ensure restricted items are properly hidden
- **Functionality Testing**: Confirm CS users can still perform allowed actions
- **Error Handling**: Test behavior when profile data is unavailable

### Security Testing
- **Access Verification**: Confirm restricted features are not accessible
- **URL Protection**: Verify direct URL access is handled properly
- **State Management**: Test role changes during active sessions
- **Edge Cases**: Handle scenarios with invalid or missing role data

This implementation provides a solid foundation for role-based access control while maintaining a clean, intuitive user experience for both administrators and customer service staff.
